---
title: "A multi-regional neural network model for conscious perception"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2023-09-07-talk
venue: "Oxford University"
date: 2023-09-07
location: University of Athens, Department of History and Philosophy of Science
---

  
Oxford University, Mathematical Insitute  
[Models of Consciousness 4 (MoC4) Conference 2023](https://amcs-community.org/events/moc-4-2023/)  
Oxford, UK    
by the  Oxford Mathematics of Consciousness and Applications Network (OMCAN)  
[video of the talk in youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LMjNXLBUmIY)  

Abstract  
-
A multi-regional neural network model for conscious perception
Most neural network models that have been employed to study conscious
perception are non-biophysically realistic local circuit models. Nevertheless,
evidence suggests that the neural correlates of conscious perception are
distributed across the cortex. I present a large-scale, multi-regional,
anatomically and physiologically constrained neural network model of the
macaque cortex simulating Binocular Rivalry (BR)- a standard experimental
paradigm for consciousness study. The model is based on a previously studied
neural network model for working memory, which we have expanded to
account for subjects’ behavior and neural activity in a detection task. BR
emerges when dichoptically viewing dissimilar images induces perceptual
alternations dissociating the sensory stimulation from the conscious content. In
the multi-regional model, each area is represented by a local circuit capable to
reproduce the observed neural activity within one cortical area. There are 30
areas of the macaque cortex, hierarchically organized from visual to prefrontal,
and wired according to anatomical inter-areal connectivity data. The model
reproduces the neural encoding of conscious content along the cortical
hierarchy, consistent with electrophysiological recordings. The resulting neural
dynamics results from a multi-area attractor rather than on locally generated
ones. Furthermore, simulated lesions and targeted intracranial electrical
stimulations test existing predictions of different theories.
